JO Tone ee

nited States leading the way, the
de separating centuries of slow
| progress from one of hitherto

tivity of workers ane thy pe
and then doubled again. With the U |
rich world crossed a Great Divide—a divl
d anemic technica

Ith, an
a eal comfort and seemingly limitless oan poten-
tial. For the first time, rich countries experienced economic cena
that was both broad and deep, reaching al] major — F society
and producing not just greater material comfort but ~ un iis
transformations in the health and life horizons of those ae ed. As
the French economist Thomas Piketty points out in his mags
of inequality, “It was not until the twentieth century ee
growth became a tangible, unmistakable reality for eee |
The mixed economy was at the heart of this success—1n the United
States no less than in other Western nations. Capitalism played = essen-
tial role. But capitalism was not the new entrant on the econo stage.
Effective governance was. Public health measures made cities pugmes of
innovation rather than incubators of illness.!° The meteoric expansion of
public education increased not only individual opportunity but also the
economic potential of entire societies. Investments in science, higher edu-
cation, and defense spearheaded breakthroughs in medicine, transporta-
tion, infrastructure, and technology. Overarching rules and institutions
tamed and transformed unstable financial markets and turned boom-bust

terial study

economic
LS

cycles into more manageable ups and downs. Protections against exces-
sive insecurity and abject destitution encouraged the forward-looking in-
vestments and social integration that sustained growth required. At every
level of society, the gains in health, education, income, and capacity were
breathtaking. The mixed economy was a spectacularly positive-sum bar-
gain: It redistributed power and resources, but as its impacts broadened
and diffused, virtually everyone was made massively better off.

It’s an impressive record. If advanced democratic capitalism won the
twentieth century, the mixed economy deserves to stand atop the po-
dium. If foundations are giving out X Prizes for technological innova-
tion, ribbons should be pinned onto the modern machinery of economic